# useReducer: simple Counter

## Background

React's `useState` hook can get you a really long way with React state
management. That said, sometimes you want to separate the state logic from the
components that make the state changes. In addition, if you have multiple
elements of state that typically change together, then having an object that
contains those elements of state can be quite helpful.

This is where `useReducer` comes in really handy. If you're familiar with redux,
then you'll feel pretty comfortable here. If not, then you have less to unlearn
😉

This exercise will take you pretty deep into `useReducer`. Typically, you'll use
`useReducer` with an object of state, but we're going to start by managing a
single number (a `count`). We're doing this to ease you into `useReducer` and
help you learn the difference between the convention and the actual API.

Here's an example of using `useReducer` to manage the value of a name in an
input.

```javascript
function nameReducer(previousName, newName) {
  return newName
}

const initialNameValue = 'Joe'

function NameInput() {
  const [name, setName] = React.useReducer(nameReducer, initialNameValue)
  const handleChange = event => setName(event.target.value)
  return (
    <>
      <label>
        Name: <input defaultValue={name} onChange={handleChange} />
      </label>
      <div>You typed: {name}</div>
    </>
  )
}
```

One important thing to note here is that the reducer (called `nameReducer`
above) is called with two arguments:

1. the current state
2. whatever it is that the dispatch function (called `setName` above) is called
   with. This is often called an "action."

## Exercise

We're going to start off as simple as possible with a `<Counter />` component.
`useReducer` is absolutely overkill for a counter component like ours, but for
now, just focus on making things work with `useReducer`.

## Extra Drill Down

### 1. 💯 accept the step as the action

I want to change things a bit to have this API:

```javascript
const [count, changeCount] = React.useReducer(countReducer, initialCount)
const increment = () => changeCount(step)
```

How would you need to change your reducer to make this work?

This one is just to show that you can pass anything as the action.

### 2. 💯 simulate setState with an object

Remember `this.setState` from class components? If not, lucky you 😉. Either
way, let's see if you can figure out how to make the state updater (`dispatch`
function) behave in a similar way by changing our `state` to an object
(`{count: 0}`) and then calling the state updater with an object which merges
with the current state.

So here's how I want things to look now:

```javascript
const [state, setState] = React.useReducer(countReducer, {
  count: initialCount,
})
const {count} = state
const increment = () => setState({count: count + step})
```

How would you need to change the reducer to make this work?

### 3. 💯 simulate setState with an object OR function

`this.setState` from class components can also accept a function. So let's add
support for that with our simulated `setState` function. See if you can figure
out how to make your reducer support both the object as in the last extra credit
as well as a function callback:

```javascript
const [state, setState] = React.useReducer(countReducer, {
  count: initialCount,
})
const {count} = state
const increment = () =>
  setState(currentState => ({count: currentState.count + step}))
```

### 4. 💯 traditional dispatch object with a type and switch statement

Ok, now we can finally see what most people do conventionally (mostly thanks to
redux). Update your reducer so I can do this:

```javascript
const [state, dispatch] = React.useReducer(countReducer, {
  count: initialCount,
})
const {count} = state
const increment = () => dispatch({type: 'INCREMENT', step})
```

## 🦉 Other notes

### lazy initialization

This one's not an extra credit, but _sometimes_ lazy initialization can be
useful, so here's how we'd do that with our original hook App:

```javascript
function init(initialStateFromProps) {
  return {
    pokemon: null,
    loading: false,
    error: null,
  }
}

// ...

const [state, dispatch] = React.useReducer(reducer, props.initialState, init)
```

So, if you pass a third function argument to `useReducer`, it passes the second
argument to that function and uses the return value for the initial state.

This could be useful if our `init` function read into localStorage or something
else that we wouldn't want happening every re-render.
